QL language specification: bring library path documentation up to date (#3476)
github/codeql: docs/language/ql-handbook/language.rst

For a QL program to be *valid*, it must conform to a variety of conditions that are described throughout this specification; otherwise the program is said to be *invalid*. An implementation of QL must detect all invalid programs and refuse to evaluate them.

Library path
------------

The library path is an ordered list of directory locations. It is used
for resolving module imports (see `Module resolution <#module-resolution>`__). The library path is not strictly
speaking a core part of the QL language, since different
implementations of QL construct it in slightly different ways. Most QL
tools also allow you to explicitly specify the library path on the command line for a

> particular invocation, though that is that is rarely done, and only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
particular invocation, though that is rarely done, and only
```

For a QL program to be *valid*, it must conform to a variety of conditions that are described throughout this specification; otherwise the program is said to be *invalid*. An implementation of QL must detect all invalid programs and refuse to evaluate them.

Library path
------------

The library path is an ordered list of directory locations. It is used

> for resolving module imports (see `Module resolution <#module-resolution>`__)). The library path is not strictly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for resolving module imports (see `Module resolution <#module-resolution>`__). The library path is not strictly
```

Sorry, my previous suggestion included an extra `)`!

speaking a core part of the QL language, since different
implementations of QL construct it in slightly different ways. Most QL
tooling also allows specifying it explicitly on the command line for a
particular invocation, though that is that is rarely done, and only
useful in very special situation. This section describes the default
construction of the library path.

First, determine the *query directory* of the ``.ql`` file being
compiled. Starting with the directory containing the ``.ql`` file, and
walking up the directory structure, each directory is checked for a
file called ``queries.xml`` or ``qlpack.yml``. The first directory
where such a file is found is the query directory. If there is no such
directory, the directory of the ``.ql`` file itself is the query
directory.

A ``queries.xml`` file that defines a query directory must always
contain, containing a single top-level tag named
``queries``, which has a ``language`` attribute set to the identifier

> of the active database scheme (for example, ``<queries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the active database schema (for example, ``<queries
```

We mostly use database "schema" in the docs.

language="java"/>``).

A ``qlpack.yml`` file defines a `QL pack
<https://help.semmle.com/codeql/codeql-cli/reference/qlpack-overview.html>`;
its content is described in the CodeQL CLI documentation. This file

> will not be recognized when using older QL tooling that is not based

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will not be recognized when using legacy tools that are not based
```

Using "legacy tools" here for consistency with other parts of the documentation, e.g. [Notes for legacy QL CLI users](https://help.semmle.com/codeql/notes-ql-users.html).

on the CodeQL CLI (that is, LGTM.com, LGTM Enterprise, Odasa, QL for
Eclipse, and QL for Visual Studio).

If both a ``queries.xml`` and a ``qlpack.yml`` exist in the same
directory the latter takes precedence (and the former is assumed to
exist for compatibility with older tooling).

The query directory itself becomes the first element of the library
path.

> In old tooling that doesn't recognize ``qlpack.yml``, the default
> value of the rest of the library path is hard-coded in the tooling for
> each supporting language. It contains directories within the Odasa
> distribution that define the default CodeQL libraries for the selected
> language. Which language to use depends on the ``language`` attibute
> of the ``queries.xml`` file if not overridden with a ``--language``
> option to Odasa.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In legacy QL tools that don't recognize ``qlpack.yml`` files, the default
value of the rest of the library path for
each supported language is hard-coded. The tools contain directories within the ODASA
distribution that define the default CodeQL libraries for the selected
language. Which language to use depends on the ``language`` attribute
of the ``queries.xml`` file if not overridden with a ``--language``
option to the ODASA CLI.
```

> On the other hand, the CodeQL CLI and newer tooling based on it (e.g.,
> GitHub Code Scanning and the Visual Stidio Code extension for CodeQL)
> constructs a default library path using QL packs. For each QL pack

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the other hand, the CodeQL CLI and newer tools based on it (such as
GitHub Code Scanning and the CodeQL extension for Visual Studio Code)
construct a default library path using QL packs. For each QL pack
```

> added to the language path, the QL packs named in its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
added to the library path, the QL packs named in its
```
(I might be wrong here)

``libraryPathDependencies`` will be subsequently added to the library
path, and the process continues until all packs have been
resolved. The actual library path consists of the root directories of
the selected QL packs. This process depends on a mechanism for finding

> QL packs by pack name, as described in the CodeQL CLI documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
QL packs by pack name, as described in the `CodeQL CLI documentation <https://help.semmle.com/codeql/codeql-cli.html>`__.
```

When the query directory contains a ``queries.xml`` file but no
``qlpack.yml``, the QL pack resolution behaves as if it defines a QL

> pack with no name and a single library-path dependency named

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pack with no name and a single library path dependency named
```

(Minor: we're now minimizing use of hyphens in line with GitHub style)

``legacy-libraries-LANGUAGE`` where ``LANGUAGE`` is taken from
``queries.xml``. The ``github/codeql`` repository provides packs with
names following this pattern, which themselves depend on the actual
CodeQL libraries for each language.

> When the query directory contains neither ``queries.xml`` nor
> ``qlpack.yml`` it will be considered to be a QL pack with no name and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the query directory contains neither a ``queries.xml`` nor
``qlpack.yml`` file, it is considered to be a QL pack with no name and
```

no library dependencies. This causes the library path to consist of

> *only* the query directory itself, which is not generally useful --
> but will suffice to run toy examples of QL code that don't actually
> use information from the database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*only* the query directory itself. This is not generally useful,
but it suffices for running toy examples of QL code that don't
use information from the database.
```

For qualified identifiers (``a.b``):

-  Build up a list of *candidate search paths*, consisting of the

>    current file's directory, and each of the directories on the

Reviewer 2: The order is actually the "current file's directory", "current file's query directory", then the library path. See `lookup` in `QueryImportResolver` for the code. We also don't seem to mention underscore to space replacement. We try to find the file once without replace underscores with spaces in all section and then with replacement.

Author: I couldn't find any code that would look up "current file's query directory" -- where should I look?

Reviewer 2: `QueryImportResolver:58`

Reviewer 2: We actually look up the current folders query directory, but that gets equivalent results.

Author: Hmm, I see.

That code looks somewhat iffy, though. It doesn't recognize `qlpack.yml` even if we're `codeql`, and it doesn't use the virtual file system if we're the IDE.

I think we should consider removing that behavior rather than documenting it. The query directory for a `.qll` file will generally already be on the library path (so files relative to there will still be found, although later in the search sequence). And it would make sense to me simply to prepend the query directory for a `.ql` file to the library path once and for all -- that's what `codeql` already does.

Reviewer 2: `QueryDirectory` does now recognise `qlpack.yml` as a query directory. We don't use the virtual file system for anything except ql file contents currently so this matches everything else. This behaviour also matches better what we plan to do with encapsulated packs where unspecified imports will only resolve within a single pack unless we are using backwards compatibility features like libarypaths.

Author: OK then. Changed.

The underscore replacement thing seems orthogonal and should go in a separate PR, I think.

>    *library path* (in order).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `library path <#library-path>`__ (in order).
```
